---
title: "Active and Latent Social Groups and Their Interactional Expertise"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2019-11-01-paper1
excerpt: 'The article delineates the distinction between an active social group and a latent social category, based on group members ability to maintain social boundaries'
date: 2019-10-01
venue: 'Acta Sociologica'
#slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides3.pdf'
paperurl: 'https://www.jstor.org/stable/48561356'
citation: 'Arminen, I., Segersven, O., & Simonen, M. (2019). Active and latent social groups and their interactional expertise. Acta Sociologica, 62(4): 391–405.'
---

As a part of their normative theory of expertise, Harry Collins and Robert Evans proposed that
interactional expertise forms the third kind of knowledge, located between formal proposi-
tional knowledge and embodied skills. Interactional expertise refers to the capability to grasp
the conceptual structure of another’s social world, and it is expressed as the ability to speak
fluently the language spoken in that social world. According to their theory, it is a key concept
of sociology, because it refers to the understanding and coordination of joint actions between
members of different social groups. Collins and Evans have further claimed that minority social
group members tend to outpace majority social group members in terms of interactional
expertise. Drawing on ethnomethodology, we detail the ways in which interactional expertise
is displayed and revealed in experiments. This allowed us to specify the underlying reasons for
the distribution of interactional expertise between social groups. Our results indicate that the
difference between the groups depends on whether a group is either actively maintained or a
passive latent category, because interactional expertise provides for not only the crossing of
social boundaries but also their maintenance. The minority social group members’ greater
interactional expertise or competence is therefore proven to be illusory.

